Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

# Energy Strategy Reviews

[journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/esr](https://www.elsevier.com/locate/esr)


## Impacts of digitalization and societal changes on energy transition: a novel socio-techno-economic energy system model

### L. Stermieri [a], T. Kober [a], R. McKenna [d][,][e], T.J. Schmidt [b][,][c], E. Panos [a][,] [* ]

a Paul Scherrer Institute, Laboratory for Energy Systems Analysis, Energy Economics Group, Forschungsstrasse 111, 5232, Villigen PSI, Switzerland
b Paul Scherrer Institute, Research Division Energy & Environment, Forschungsstrasse 111, 5232, Villigen PSI, Switzerland
c ETH Zurich, Institute for Molecular Physical Sciences, Dep. of of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 1-5/10, 8093, Zurich, Switzerland
d Paul Scherrer Institute, Laboratory for Energy Systems Analysis, Forschungsstrasse 111, 5232, Villigen PSI, Switzerland
e ETH Zurich, Chair of Energy Systems Analysis, Institute of Energy and Process Engineering, Dep. of Mechanical and Process Eng., Clausiusstrasse 33, 8092, Zurich,
_Switzerland_


A R T I C L E I N F O

Handling Editor: Mark Howells

_Keywords:_
ICT
Consumer behavior
Social practice
Energy system analysis
Agent-based modeling
Climate target

**1. Introduction**


A B S T R A C T

The increased diffusion of information and communication technologies (ICTs) impacts daily life and economic
growth. It introduces new social practices for households and business models for companies that influence
society and energy infrastructure development. A framework capable of quantifying and analyzing the impact of
digitalization on achieving energy and climate targets, with a focus on behavioral changes induced by ICT, is
currently lacking. In this paper, a new framework is developed that is technology-rich and captures the pref­
erences and behaviors of households and firms in the energy system to assess sustainable energy system con­
figurations that are technically and socially feasible. The framework is designed and demonstrated for
Switzerland. We find, for example, that teleworking in Switzerland reduces commuting demand by 10%, and the
savings in transport expenses can favor the investment in efficient and clean residential technologies to
compensate for the increased residential energy demand due to working at home. This manuscript contributes to
the growing literature of suitable frameworks and case studies to account for the co-evolution of society and
energy systems in achieving the transition to low-carbon economies.


Digital transformation implies a continuous process of change, with
the emergence of new business models, the increase in the use of digital
technologies, and more prevalence of the Internet of Things [1].
The spread of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs)
impacts everyday life and the economy, affects society, and enables new
energy and communication infrastructures [2]. ICTs can mitigate envi­
ronmental degradation [3] and support the energy goals identified by
the Paris Climate Agreement [4]. ICTs can also contribute to achieve
cost-efficient pathways toward carbon neutrality by providing flexibility
to energy vectors coupling through cross-sectoral technologies, recog­
nized as a prerequisite for accomplishing the goal [5]. However, their
impact on energy consumption and supply patterns [6] is not trivial to
assess, increasing the difficulties of implementing targeted policies to
strengthen the beneficial contribution of ICTs and reduce their negative
implications to the environment and energy systems [7]. Furthermore,

 - Corresponding author.
_[E-mail address: evangelos.panos@psi.ch (E. Panos).](mailto:evangelos.panos@psi.ch)_


the absence of retrospective data [8], the need to capture emerging
energy behaviors [9], and the unfamiliarity of some consumer groups
with internet-based services [10] contribute to increasing the challenges
in assessing the implication of ICT applications over a long time horizon.
To quantify the effect that the digital transition will have on future
energy targets, an analysis that is robust in assessing changes in user
behavior and the implications for the changing behaviors on the energy
supply and demand sectors, accounting for cross-sectoral in­
terdependencies, is needed [11].
This paper presents a framework able to represent in detail both
socio-economic structures and energy systems implications connected to
ICT applications. The framework couples the Swiss TIMES Energy Sys­
tems Model (STEM) [12], based on the TIMES energy systems modelling
framework of IEA-ETSAP [13], with a new socio-technical-economic
agent-based model, the so-called Socio-Economic Energy model for
Digitalization – SEED, which has been specifically designed to interact
with it. The SEED model is a first-of-its-kind because it adopts a social


[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2023.101224](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2023.101224)
Received 15 February 2023; Received in revised form 4 September 2023; Accepted 28 September 2023

Available online 14 October 2023
[2211-467X/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)


-----


practice approach to analyze the impact of new lifestyles enabled by
ICTs (e.g., teleworking, e-learning, e-services) on energy consumption
patterns by accounting for agents’ heterogeneity. This allows accounting
for socio-economic and technical aspects affecting the rate of adoption
of technologies. The SEED-STEM framework assesses long-term energy
transition pathways, and the resulting energy system configurations
account for citizens’ preferences, energy supply, resource, and tech­
nology constraints, as well as different energy and climate change
mitigation policies, when calculating energy mixes, investments, and
prices.
The new SEED model has a generic design and can be linked with any
other energy system optimization model based on TIMES or a similar
energy systems modeling framework, e.g., OSEMOSYS [14], RE[3]ASON

[15]. This constitutes a major contribution of this work to the energy
systems modeling research community.
The paper is subdivided as follows: section 2 includes the literature
review and section 3 describes the SEED model and its coupling with
STEM. Section 4 demonstrates the coupled SEED-STEM framework for
the case study of teleworking in Switzerland. The results are shown in
section 5, while the paper concludes in section 6. The detailed mathe­
matical formulation is in the Appendix.

**2. Literature review: including the effect of societal changes due**
**to ICTs in energy systems analysis**

Due to the diffusion of ICTs into everyday life, new social practices
and business models have been emerging (e.g., e-banking, e-commerce,
online shopping, e-learning, etc.). This digitalization of practices [16]
enables a systemic transformation of society through the utilization of
new technologies, the acquisition of new competencies, and the devel­
opment of new social preferences for these practices [17]. Considering
that energy is needed and used to accomplish a social practice [18],
understanding how social practices develop and change over time and
space also means understanding the evolution in energy demands [19].
For example, ICTs impact residential energy consumption and patterns
due to flexible working patterns [20] and the simultaneous performance
of different activities [21], which changes the time of the day when they
are performed [22]. The population’s growing online activities shift the
peak of internet use to the earlier evening, accentuating the electricity
peak [23]. The substitution of several end-uses devices with a single ICT
device, particularly smartphones, can reduce the power demand by a
factor of 100 [24].
The evolution of energy-consuming practices induced by ICT over
time and their implication on the energy system should be addressed to
understand the potential role of these practices on energy transition. In
the IPCC report [25], lifestyle changes and new energy-consuming
practices are recognized as essential to accelerate the achievement of
net-zero GHG emissions energy systems compatible with the Paris
Agreement climate change mitigation targets [4].
To assess their impact on energy transition, the evolution of digital
social practices needs to be supported with a detailed representation of
the energy system and its complexity. Bottom-up energy system costoptimization models allow for such detailed representation, inte­
grating policy goals [26]. They are widely used to inform
decision-makers about the technical feasibility of decarbonization
pathways [27].
Trutnevyte et al. [28] criticize these models, however, stating that
they have “limited representations of societal transformations, such as the
_behavior of various actors, transformation dynamics in time, and heteroge­_
_neity across and within societies”. The lack of the representation of societal_
factors in energy systems models leads to the so-called “socio-technical
optimization gap” [28]. To this end, the suggested cost-optimal solu­
tions might not be feasible in their implementation in reality. Besides,
Trutnevyte [29] concluded that cost-optimal energy system models do
not approximate the real-world transition due to parametric and struc­
tural uncertainty. To bridge the gap, parameters encapsulating the


influence of key energy system actors need to be included in future
energy scenarios [30]. Different attempts exist in the literature to
implement social and behavioral aspects in energy models. For example,
Bolwig et al. [31] performed a literature review on the social acceptance
of onshore wind energy and transmission lines. They translated it (from
low to high) into a multiplier affecting the investment of such technol­
ogies, demonstrating how low social acceptance may negatively affect
the energy transition pathways. Li et al. [32] concluded that
non-monetary factors strongly affect citizens’ choices, hinder the
adoption of renewable technologies, and increase the difficulties in
achieving decarbonization targets.
Within the large IEA-ETSAP energy modeling community using the
TIMES framework [13], the TIMES-Households model [33] analyzes the
heterogeneity of technology choice of households by providing a com­
bination of key factors affecting the choice identified by a survey. They
concluded that the technology diffusion patterns obtained are more
realistic than those without including such hetetogeneity. In the
CA-TIMES model, a new parameter for travel time investment is intro­
duced to represent modal choice selection between different transport
modes from individuals [34]. The model allows them to represent the
real-world drawbacks of public transport, such as the additional time
associated with such transport mode and the investment needed by the
government to increase its efficiency and consequently its acceptance by
the population.
In the context of Switzerland, in the Swiss TIMES Energy Systems
Model (STEM) [12,35,36], the consumers’ investment in new technol­
ogies results from the cost optimization analysis, where consumer en­
ergy behavior and social acceptance are represented by side constraints
approximating the deployment level of these technologies in society

[36].
All the described examples show the need in the energy systems
modeling community to link energy system models with approaches
capturing socio-technical factors to better analyze the role of society in
the energy transition. In their review, Huckebrink and Bertsch [37]
concluded that there is a need to integrate behavioral aspects of
acceptance, adoption and use of energy technologies in energy system
models to assess the impact on long-term energy projections. In partic­
ular, additional attributes other than cost affecting the energy invest­
ment of the population should be considered, such as attitudes, opinions,
lifestyle characteristics, and personal values [38].
Due to the ability of ABM to represent heterogeneity in agents’ at­
tributes and the interactions between them and their environment [39],
as well as structural aspects of the system such as policies and infra­
structure [40], it is a well-suited approach to analyze complex
human-technical systems [39].
A growing number of quantitative studies are focusing on ABM for
analyzing energy consumption-related behavioral evolution and het­
erogeneous decision-making on energy technologies [41] of the main
stakeholders of the energy transition.
Working towards a tighter representation of social aspects within
energy system models, Sachs et al. [42] integrated the multi-objective
ABM within the MUSE energy systems model to deviate from rational
economic investment from individuals, which in turn led to different
outcomes from the single-objective model, by adopting technologies (e.
g., heat pumps) not in the least cost solution. Zhang et al. [43] developed
a coupled framework of ABM with a stochastic mixed integer linear
programming model energy system model to assess the impact of
behavioral changes on energy supply demand.
For studying the effects of ICTs, literature widely uses Agent-Based
Models (ABM). For example, the use of ABMs has been applied to
assess the energy and environmental impacts of e-commerce [44],
rebound effects connected to ICTs [45,46], load shifting [47–49], and
teleworking [50]. However, the cited models dealing with ICT appli­
cations do not consider social interactions and the development of
personal preferences, do not include the interactions between different
energy sectors, and do not extend their analysis to the impact these


-----


changes will have on society. Analyzing these elements and their evo­
lution over time is needed to quantify the impact these changes will have
on energy transition.
In this paper, an ABM is presented that can simulate the evolution of
these elements over time. To the authors’ knowledge, no attempts have
been made in the literature to develop an ABM able to simulate the
adoption and spread of different digital practices with related impacts
on energy consumption by adopting a social practice approach. Two
examples of a social practice approach connected with ABM were
conceptualized by Balke et al. [51] and Narasimhan et al. [52]. Based on
the social practice theory [53], the social practice approach assesses the
evolution of everyday practices performed by individuals over time and
space. It allows analyzing the context in which individuals perform their
actions [15]. It acknowledges the heterogeneity of different social
groups in performing the same practice [54] and can help design
tailor-made incentives: for example, for peak demand shaving [55] and
electricity demand time shift ([56,57]). However, studies applying this
approach to analyze the impact on energy consumption are mainly
restricted to qualitative analyses or theoretical frameworks ([52,
58–62]). Quantitative frameworks using this approach for understand­
ing energy consumption patterns are largely lacking [63], especially
concerning the impacts related to the spread of ICTs.
The changes in energy consumption related to the adoption of digital
social practices and the implication of these changes on energy transi­
tion are analyzed via coupling with an energy system model. In this
paper, we argue that due to its fine temporal resolution and high tech­
nological details [64], the STEM energy systems model coupled with an
ABM is well-suited to analyze a socio-technical energy transition. The
aim is to enrich energy system analysis with actors’ heterogeneity to
better represent the complexity of energy demand [65], providing a
detailed representation of society’s future evolution, behavior and
practices adoption over time.
The coupled framework allows the combination of each model’s
strength [66]: it enriches energy systems analysis with actors’ hetero­
geneity, allowing the identification of socio-economic and technical
aspects affecting the rate of adoption of technologies while, at the same
time, it enriches the ABM with insights of the energy system configu­
ration and energy costs provided by the energy system model.

**3. A socio-techno-economic energy system model: a new**
**framework**

Fig. 1 shows an overview of the SEED-STEM framework. We first
describe the decision-process mechanisms in SEED for the adoption of
new social practices from households and new digital operating modes
from companies. Then, the coupling method between SEED and an en­
ergy system model is explained. The agent-based model was imple­
mented in NetLogo [67]. A detailed description of the methodology is
provided in Appendix.

_3.1. Socio-Economic Energy model for digitalization (SEED)_

The SEED concept is demonstrated by the entity-relationship dia­
gram [68] in Fig. 2. The main entities of the model are Households[1],
Firms, practices, technologies, business models, and social networks.
Household agents, representing an equal number of typical households
in Switzerland, perform social practices (e.g., cooking) to fulfill essential
needs (e.g., eating) by utilizing technologies (e.g., stove) that consume
energy (e.g., electricity). Households base their decisions on comparing
costs, preferences, and availability of practices and technologies.

1 In the text, the word Household refers to an agent in the model, and it is
written with a capital H to be distinguished from the real-world entity of a
household. The word Firm implies an agent in the model, while the word firm
implies the real-world entity of a firm.


However, preferences can be changed by interactions among House­
holds (micro-level interaction) in their social networks. Households
interact with Firms (macro-level interaction) by working for them
(employees-employer relationship) or by adopting their services (con­
sumer-firms relationship). Firm agents represent the industry and ter­
tiary sectors (one Firm agent per tertiary subsector representing schools,
hospitals, public administration, financial institutions, trade,
manufacturing, etc.), and their objective is to maximize profit by
considering the needs of employees and customers. By selecting the most
profitable business model for their company, Firms can allow or prevent
Households from performing practices. For example, by adopting the
e-commerce business model, they allow Households to perform the
practice of e-shopping.

_3.1.1. Overview of the main features and novelties_
SEED is a time-dynamic recursive model representing the coevolution of the energy and societal systems in Switzerland from 2020
to 2050. Incorporating the main processes identified in the social
practice model conceptualized by Balke et al. [69], the relevant features
of the model are the following:

1) _Heterogeneity of agents: critical in ABM modeling is the incorporation_
of the actors’ heterogeneity into the model’s decision mechanism. As
described in the next section, different socio-economic attributes
identify each Household and Firm, resulting in heterogeneous deci­
sion processes for practices, technologies, and business models.
2) _Dynamic simulation and update of agents’_ _attributes over time: SEED_
does not assume that agents are invariable over time. For example,
agents’ income is updated, and new agents can enter the simulation
while others are removed from the decision process due to ageing.
3) _Social practices representation: SEED implements the social practice_
approach by allowing Households agents to select social practices to
fulfill needs: traveling, shopping, working, eating, heating the house,
and using electrical appliances. Social practices in SEED can be
subdivided into “Conventional” and “Digital”. Digital social prac­
tices, such as teleworking, e-shopping, and e-learning, require the
use of digital technology in contrast to conventional practices, such
as going to work, grocery, or going to school. The adoption of a
digital practice implies a gradual phase-out of a prior onventional
practice. The speed of this replacement is based on the amount of
time Households need to perform the digital practice, represented by
their attribute “intensity of ICT use”. The digital practices depend on
the business models selected by Firms, which are also distinguished
into “Conventional” and “Digital”. Digital business models analyzed
in SEED are remote work with shared desks, e-commerce, and elearning. The growth of digital social practices and business models
is associated with increased internet data demand that allows SEED
to consider network infrastructure requirements and data center
demand.
4) _Spread of digitalization: three indicators, based on the Network_
Readiness Index [70], drive the evolution of digitalization in SEED:
the intensity of digital practice among the population (representing
the digital readiness of the population), the budget of companies
attributed to ICTs investment, the probability of having a digital job
for the newly-entered Households agent (representing the role that
government plays in creating more digital-intensive jobs). The
budget for ICTs investment constrains the decision process of Firms
investing in digital business models, while the probability of having a
digital job for the new Household agent impacts the total number of
Household agents that are allowed to perform digital practices in
their job. A different growth of these indicators can be assumed in
SEED to develop digital scenarios.
5) _Detailed sectoral representation: SEED includes major end-use sectors._
In the residential sector, the model identifies the end-uses of heating
and electric appliances. SEED represents two building types (multifamily and single-family), each characterized by eight building


-----


**Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the socio-techno-economic energy system model framework. The Socio-Economic Energy model for Digitalization (SEED) is**
based on an agent-based model approach, while the Swiss TIMES Energy system Model (STEM) [35] is based on TIMES framework. The coupling between the two
models is represented by the green and red arrows. The SEED model is schematized in four boxes: 1. Agents, 2. Activities and consumption aspects, 3. Decisions, and
4. Interactions.


periods. The model distinguishes urban and rural archetypes for grid
infrastructure availability, e.g., natural gas and district heating grids,
public transport availability, and charging infrastructure. At the
same time, the model represents the main tertiary sectors of educa­
tion, public administration, commerce, IT, real estate, hospitality,
insurance, and research.
6) _Technology rich: SEED leverages the STEM technology database._
Several end-use technologies compete to supply energy service de­
mands for heating, electricity, and mobility. Each technology is
characterized by its CAPEX and OPEX, efficiency, lifetime, and dis­
count rate (including hurdle rates for the different agents). Besides
the technical-economic characterization, SEED also includes addi­
tional non-technical attributes for each technology, such as
perceived comfort and environmental labels. The included technol­
ogies for transport are internal combustion engines, battery electric,
plug-in, hybrid and fuel-cell vehicles, as well as public transport. The
residential heating demand can be satisfied by adopting oil, gas, and
wood boilers, electric resistance, district heating, gas and electric
heat pumps. For electricity, agents can install photovoltaic panels
and/or connect to the electricity grid. Additionally, the heating de­
mand can be reduced by adopting insulation measures or lowering
the heating temperature.
7) _Interaction of agents: The interaction between different typologies of_
agents occurs in different hierarchical levels [75]: a micro and macro
level. The learning process of Households at the micro-level occurs
through interactions in “social media” and “face-to-face” networks.

At the macro-level, Firms collect feedback from Households
regarding their willingness to perform a social practice and their satis­
faction level with the services offered by the Firms.


The exchange of information between micro and macro levels re­
flects one of the disruptive effects of digital transformation: the decision
processes of institutional decision-makers and private citizens become
more interconnected.

_3.1.2. Simulation process_
When performing a simulation with SEED (Fig. 3), five phases are
identified:

1) **Initialization: all the exogenous inputs are provided to the model.**

  - Input for scenario analysis: policies and scenario assumptions (see
section 4.4.)

  - Input for socio-economic structure: synthetic population of agents,
building stock evolution, population and GDP growth, probability
distributions for job types, education, age, income, lifestyles and
values, infrastructure availability

  - Input from coupling with STEM: evolution over the time horizon of
energy prices, CAPEX, OPEX, and efficiencies of end-use
technologies.

The heterogeneity of Households accounts for different socioeconomic attributes, such as income classes, educational degrees, age
cohorts, job types, annual travel demand, available budget for lifestyle
expenses, lifestyle needs and preferences, intensity of ICT use, social and
virtual interactions, perceptions of risk in investment, trust in informa­
tion provided by the government (Table 1). Furthermore, two satisfac­
tion attributes (employee satisfaction and customer satisfaction)
characterize the macro-level interactions. The heterogeneity of Firms is
based on different job types, gross value added, available budget for ICT
investment, office space, energy service demand, internet data demand,


-----


**Fig. 2. The entity-relationship diagram depicts the main entities of the SEED model with their relationships and attributes. It shows the entities of the SEED model**
(Households, practices, technologies, Firms, and business models as rectangular boxes, the relationships as diamond-shaped boxes, while attributes are represented as
circular boxes.


and digitalization level.
A synthetic population approach [82] is applied to simulate the
households of Switzerland and ensures statistical equivalence with the
real Swiss population, similar to the approach of Panos et al. [75]. The
synthetic population of agents is based on a Latin hypercube sampling

[83] using joint probability distributions fitted to aggregated
socio-demographic data. The Swiss Household Energy Demand Survey
(SHEDS) [74], a useful resource to initialize agents ([84,85]), is used to
identify lifestyle needs and preferences (Table 2). These qualitative re­
sponses are translated into quantitative preferences by converting from
the Likert scale [86] to the range [0,1]. These attributes are matched
with socio-demographic attributes (income, age group, education,
Sinus-Milieus®) to initialize the synthetic population. Furthermore,
each Household is randomly initialized to a specific age within the
boundary of its age group. The initial number of Household agents is 441
and evolves over time based on the assumed demographic growth.
Additionally, a normal distribution is fitted to the Microcensus 2015

[78] to attribute to each Household a heterogeneous share of kilometers
used for commuting, shopping, education, and leisure activities (see
Appendix D).

2) **Dynamic evolution: the time dynamic components reported in**

Table 1 (Income, Age, Preference values, trust in information, annual
mileage, expenditure, intensity of usage of ICT technology, social
link, and residential energy demand) are updated in each simulation
year.

Only the Household agents corresponding to the working population
from 18 to 65 years participate in the decision process as they can also
participate in the macro-interaction as employees (eq.A.36). New


Household agents are introduced with statistically similar sociodemographic attributes (Age, Income, Education, Job Type, and SinusMilieus®) as the ones considered in the initialization phase (same dis­
tributions and same correlations between them). The new agents’
preferences reflect the society’s state when they enter society. Each
preference is initialized as a random variable following a normal dis­
tribution (eq.A.31-A.33). The available income of Household agents
followed the assumed annual GDP growth. The new Households are
initialized with the available income at the time of their entrance into
society (eq.A.37).
The evolution of the building stock is based on the survival proba­
bility assumed for each building (different according to building type
and period). New buildings are built following the annual growth
extrapolated by the dataset used for Switzerland [77]. The new
Households are randomly located at an available building based on their
preference for a multi-family or single-family house. When a building is
demolished, the Households living there are randomly re-allocated to
another available building. Finally, the three parameters driving the
digitalization of society (see 3.1.1) are updated based on the scenario
assumptions (eq.A.34, eq.A.35, eq.A.38).

3) **Decision-making process of agents: Household agents have a two-**
level decision mechanism. First, they decide on the social practice,
and then they decide on echnologies. The decision on which practice
to adopt is based on the maximization of a weighted utility function
(eq.A.1) that considers the cost of the performed practice (eq.A.3),
agents’ preferences for social practices (eq.A.2), infrastructure access
anxiety (eq.A.4), and market share of the practices (eq.A.5). The
decision to adopt a suitable technology is also based on the maxi­
mization of a weighted utility function (eq.A.8-A.18) with


-----


**Fig. 3. Simplified SEED algorithm and nomenclature. The detailed mathematical formulation of the difference phases is reported in the Appendix.**


components similar to the ones explained for the social practice
function. Firms maximize their expected profit when changing from
a conventional business model to a digital one. As mentioned above
(3.1.1), the decision mechanisms of the two agent types in SEED are
not independent. They are also explained in detail in sections 3.1.3 3.1.4 using the case of teleworking.
4) **Interactions: through interactions in social networks, Household**
agents modify their preferences for practices and technologies over
time (Fig. 4). In the face-to-face network, Household agents interact
within their neighborhood and working space. It is a simulation of
the physical interactions between the agents, which is constrained by
their spatial proximity. In the social media network, the spatial
proximity constraint is lifted, but the update of the preferences is
weaker than in the physical case. The interactions between House­
holds follow an opinion dynamics model with asymmetric confi­
dence [87] to simulate their learning process (eq.A.30). A Household
interacts only with the other Households in its social networks whose
preferences “differ from his own not more than a certain confidence
_level” [87]. The confidence level, ranging from 0 to a positive upper_
bound, depends on the trust of the received information and shapes
the ability of a Household to change its preferences (Fig. 4). The


speed of this change (learning speed) and the number of links be­
tween Households in both social networks depends on the Sinus-­
Milieus® of Households. The links are associated with probabilities
for their creation and destruction based on [66] (see supplementary
material).
5) **Output: the output from SEED can be classified into two main**
categories:

  - Energy system related output for coupling with STEM: aggregate en­

ergy services demands of residential, transport, and services sec­
tors of the country over the time horizon (private cars transport
demand, public transport demand, light vehicles freight transport
demand, residential heating demand, residential electricity de­
mand, tertiary sector heating demand, tertiary sector electricity
demand, internet data demand), residential and transport tech­
nology adoption. Details on the coupling are provided in section
3.2.

  - Socio-economic output: share of social practices performed (going to
work, teleworking, shopping, e-shopping, learning, e-learning,
heating the house, using electric appliances, heat saving feedback,
electricity saving feedback, thermostat temperature reduction,
renovation measures), digitalization intensity of society.


-----


**Table 1**
The socio-economic attributes for Households and Firms are described, together with the reference dataset concerning the application for Switzerland. The last column
of the table provides information on the evolution over time of the attributes, which can be static or dynamic over the time horizon.

**Socio-economic attribute** **Heterogeneity of Households** **dataset** **Static/**
**dynamic**

**Income** The distribution income (Lognormal, μ = 1.3, sd = 0.6) is grouped into five groups with average incomes of: [71] Dynamic
4000 CHF/m, 4500 CHF/m, 6200 CHF/m, 8300 CHF/m, 13,800 CHF/m

Education Degree secondary I, degree secondary II, degree tertiary [72] Static
Age 18-24,25–44,45-65 [73] Dynamic
Location Urban/Rural [74] Static
Sinus-Milieus It represents the heterogeneity of societal values and lifestyles among the population, subdivided into 10 [75] Static
groups.

Job 12 types of jobs in different sectors [76] Static
List of social parameters e.g., Environment, Comfort, Time saving, Leisure, (Table 2) [74] Static
Preferences’ value To each social parameter is attributed a value from 0 to 1 [74] Dynamic
Trust in information Trust in social network and physical network [74] Dynamic
Building type Multi-family, Single Family [77] Static
Annual mileage Total kilometers driven per year subdivided into the type of trip (leisure, commuting, education, shopping [78] Dynamic
Share of expenditure The available income is subdivided into expenditures: transport, residential, savings, and other [79] Dynamic
Universe Represent the weight of the universe of the agent, the number of real-world households represented by that [77] Static
Household agent

Practices The set of practices performed by the Household agent assumption Dynamic
Intensity of usage of ICT Intensity of usage of ICT technology assumption Dynamic
technology

Technology Set of technology used by the agent assumption Dynamic
Social network link Number of connections in the social networks throw which Households exchange preferences and ideas [75] Dynamic
Residential energy demands Heat and electricity demand connected to the building type and period [77] Dynamic

**Socio-economic attribute** **Heterogeneity of Firms** **dataset** **Static/**
**dynamic**

Job type The type of jobs attributed to the specific company and subsector of the tertiary sector [76,80] Static
Gross Value Added Gross value added is used as a proxy to evaluate the value the sector attributes to ICT technology [81] Dynamic
Employees The number of employees (Households agent) [76] Dynamic
Space The office space attributed to the companies in km2 assumption Dynamic

[77]

Tertiary sector energy demands Heating, Electricity and internet data demand [77] Dynamic
Digitalization level The digitalization level is modeled as an s-shaped function, it uses as a proxy the intensity of adoption of a assumption Dynamic
practice to evaluate the digitalization of a company

The intensity of adoption of a The intensity of adoption of practice and related digital business model assumption Dynamic
business model

Practices Set of practices (business model) adopted by the Firm agent assumption Dynamic
List of social parameters List of social parameters: satisfaction of employees, satisfaction of customers, policy readiness, digital assumption Static
readiness

Preference value List of values of social parameters assumption Dynamic


_3.1.3. Decision process of Household agents_
The two-level decision mechanism of Household agents is further
explained in this section, focusing on the example of the digital practice
of “Teleworking”.
Households can choose between the conventional practice of “Going
to work” and the digital practice of “Teleworking”. “Going to work”
requires the use of transport technology to fulfill the demand for
commuting, while “teleworking” involves the use of a laptop and
internet access. Households can opt for “Teleworking” only if their job
can be performed remotely, and it is allowed by the Firms where the
Households work.
“Going to work” includes the cost of commuting, based on the cost of
using a private vehicle or buying a public transport ticket. “Tele­
working” allows one to avoid travel expenses for commuting, but
additional residential costs for heating and electricity demand must be
considered (eq.A.3). Concerning preferences, “Going to work” nega­
tively impacts the working/free time schedule, but it does not require
any digital skills in contrast to “Teleworking”. Distance is another
preference criterion as “Going to work” might be less attractive for
Households living in the countryside due to the long commuting time,
which can be avoided by adopting “Teleworking”. The preference
component (eq.A.2) of the utility function (eq.A.1) compares the
aforementioned Household preferences with the opportunities offered
by the social practices (Table 2). This approach is based on the con­
ceptual framework developed by Holtz [88], which assumes that
households attribute the highest importance to the practice that closely
matches their preferences. The infrastructure access anxiety component


is zero for “Going to work”, while “Teleworking” represents the avail­
ability of the internet infrastructures as a function of Household living
location (eq.A.4). Finally, the market share component represents the
spread of the practice within the social networks of Households (eq.A.5).
After selecting the social practice that maximizes its utility function
(eq.A.6) and updating the energy demand connected to it (eq.A.7), the
next step for the Household agent is to decide on using the existing or
investing in new technologies by maximizing the technologies specific
utility functions (see 3.1.2) subject to its available income (eq.A.8 – eq.
A.18). Each Household allocates its available income to essential ex­
penses (rent, food, taxes, social insurance), savings, and energy ex­
penses, further subdivided between transport and residential expenses.
The budget for residential and transport investment decisions is kept
constant as a fixed share of the available income for energy expenses
plus the savings (eq.A.16).
In the utility function associated with the technology decision, the
cost component (eq.A.11) represents the selected technology’s annual­
ized cost (ANPV), while the infrastructure availability component deters
the agent from investing in technology if the infrastructure needed by
the technology is not available (eq.A.13). For example, district heating
and natural gas boilers can only be selected if the relevant grid is
available. Similarly, in transport, the infrastructure component of the
utility function is formulated as an anxiety function regarding the
availability of charging stations by considering the annual mileage
covered by the Household agent.
The decision to invest in new technology can be triggered by the end
of the lifetime of the current technology or by any changes impacting the


-----


**Fig. 4. Interactions of Households in their social networks.**


utility function. The latter can incur due to changes in energy demand or
preferences or due to the availability of new technologies that are more
competitive than the existing ones (provided that the capital payment of
the existing ones continues to occur until the end of the lifetime of the
existing technology (eq.A.16)).


_3.1.4. Decision processes of Firms agents_
Firm agents adopt the business model that maximizes their profit.
Continuing with the example of “Teleworking”, Firms evaluate the
benefit of adopting the “Remote work” digital business model instead of
the conventional “Working in the office”.
First, the Firm considers the number of working days its employees
would like to perform as “Teleworking”, identified as the average


-----


**Table 2**
The social parameters of household agents (first column) are used in the preference component of the utility function of Households to evaluate Households preferences to adopt practices and technologies. The table shows
the connection between social preferences and the ractice (column named P), Transport technologies (TT), Residential Heating technologies (RHT), Residential Electricity Technologies (RET), and Firms (F) to which they
refer.

P TT RHT RET F


Social parameter of
household agents:
preferences


Teleworking Commuting ICE electric plug hybrids fuel public Natural Oil Wood District Electric Electric
vehicles vehicles in cell transport gas boiler boiler boiler heating boiler heat
pump


Natural
gas heat
pump


Solar Photovoltaic Electricity Tertiary
thermal panel grid sector


Balance between x x
work/free time

Free time scheduling x x
Commuting distance x x x x x x x x
Importance of time x x x x x x
savings

Traveling comfort x x x x x x
Time for leisure x x x x x x
activities


Environmental x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x
awareness

Thermal comfort x x x x x x x x
Available space x x x x x x x x x x
Noise intensity x x x x x x x x
Preference for self- x x
consumption
technologies

Digital skills x x
Infrastructure x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x
anxiety

Satisfaction as x
employee

Satisfaction as x
costumer


-----


“intensity of ICT use” among its employees (eq.A.23). Then, it performs
a cost-benefit analysis associated with the heat and electricity saved due
to not using the offices and the increase in the electricity related to the
usage of ICTs (eq.A.22).
The decision to adopt the “Remote work” business model (eq.A.19) is
calculated as the difference between the budget available to invest in
ICT technology, energy savings benefit, and the cost of moving to the
digital business (eq.A.20). The latter are expressed as new ICT in­
frastructures cost, educational cost for training employees to the new
business [89], and internet data cost. The internet data demand is
translated into an electricity demand (0.42 kWh/GB [90]) used by the
internet infrastructure and data center. If the Firm adopts the “Remote
work” business model, it allows teleworking among its employees for the
desired number of working days (eq.A.25), increasing their satisfaction
level (eq.A.27). The digital level of the Firm, represented as a logistic
function using the average “intensity of ICT use” by employees as the
input variable, will increase (eq.A.24). The more teleworking, the higher
the “digital level” of a company is. A digital level of 1 means that tele­
working is performed for 100% of the working hours.
In the opposite case, employees are not allowed to adopt “Tele­
working”, and the digital level of the Firm will not increase (A.28). This
results in a reduction in the satisfaction level of its employees (eq.A.29),
which is connected to an economic loss for the company, affecting the
decision process of Firm in the next iteration. In particular, Firms agents
are interested in keeping a high level of satisfaction among their em­
ployees to avoid absenteeism [75] or quitting, which will require
additional cost to replace those who quit (eq.A.21). They are also
interested in having a high level of consumer satisfaction for their output
product or service to be competitive in the market to avoid a reduction
in sales that would result in a loss of profit.

_3.2. The complete socio-techno-economic framework: coupling SEED and_
_STEM_

The Swiss TIMES Energy Systems Model (STEM) is a well-established
energy system model in Switzerland, widely used to assess net-zero
carbon dioxide emissions scenarios ([12,35,36]).
STEM is a technology-rich bottom-up optimization model repre­
senting the whole Swiss energy system, from resource extraction and
imports to energy conversion and end-use (industrial, residential,
commercial, and transport). The energy uses in the residential sectors
include space heating, water heating, air conditioning, electronic
equipment, appliances, cooking, lighting, washing, and refrigeration.
The transport sector in STEM includes passenger and freight transport.
The model distinguishes between different modes of transport, such as
private transport (cars and two-wheelers), public passenger road
transport, freight road transport, passenger and freight rail transport,
domestic and international aviation [12,35]. The energy used in the
industry and services sectors are subdivided into electricity and heating
process demands.
STEM assesses the least cost energy system configuration to achieve
energy targets when accounting for energy mixes, investments, prices,
trading with surrounding countries, and other constraints related to
energy technology deployment or policies and targets. The full model
documentation can be found in [12,35,36].
Coupling different modeling frameworks presents several challenges,
such as identifying connection points, a convergent solution, and
compatible mathematical formulations, depending on the linking
approach [64]. These challenges can be mitigated with a soft-linking
approach [91].
Soft-linking SEED and STEM requires identifying appropriate
connection points to exchange information (see Appendix B for the
mathematical formulation of the coupling). The main differences be­
tween them must be addressed to create a framework that can benefit
from combining each model’s strengths. First, SEED is a socio-economic
model aiming to analyze the heterogeneity of decision processes and the


factors that lead to the adoption of social practices, while STEM is a
technology-rich optimization model aiming to identify the least cost
energy system configuration. Second, the models have a different scope
in terms of knowledge of the energy system. The narrow view of
households that do not know about the whole energy system and make
decisions based on their limited knowledge is represented in SEED,
which analyzes only the choices related to the transport and residential
sectors. Instead, the social planner view of STEM reflects overarching
informed decisions thanks to its broad overview of the country’s energy
system.
STEM starts the iterations to provide a first proxy of energy prices
and energy supply infrastructure development as it captures all energy
system implications (such as trading with other countries, resources’
availability, and available power generation technologies). STEM eval­
uates the cost-optimal technology mix for the whole energy system and
provides energy cost as input for the decision process of agents in SEED
(eq.B.7-B.10). Once SEED completes its simulation, it provides as
exogenous input to STEM demands and technology shares (eq.B.1-B.6).
Tertiary sector technologies are not included in SEED. The decision
process of Firms provides the energy services demand as input to STEM,
which decides on the technology to invest in to satisfy the energy ser­
vices demand.
During this interaction, the choices from SEED can result in energy
system configurations in STEM that are infeasible. In such cases, the
iterations would fail. To avoid this, expensive backstop technologies are
introduced in STEM. STEM can select these technologies to continue the
iterations and passes high energy prices and technology costs to SEED,
which adjusts the choices of agents regarding practices and technologies
in the subsequent iteration.
The connection points, namely the information passed from SEED to
STEM via the soft-linking approach, are: end-use energy demands,
transport technology, and residential technology for single-family and
multi-family houses. Each connection point is a vector of three values
(one for each milestone year), for a total of 87 points.
A convergence criterion is applied to each of these 87 connection
points to determine when there is a convergence of results between the
two models, and the iteration process can be stopped (eq.B.11).
In SEED-STEM, the convergence of results is reached when, for each
of the 87 points between the current iteration and the previous ones, the
relative error is lower than the defined convergence criterion (the ab­
solute error is considered for the transport and residential technology
information as the value is passed as a share of activity or capacity), set
to 2%. The iteration process is then stopped, and the outcome of the
SEED-STEM framework can be analyzed.
The convergence criterion of 2% is taken to avoid wasted iterations
and help achieve a good computational time based on the parameteri­
zation of the model used to perform the scenario analysis.
The resulting energy system configuration of the coupled framework
is feasible from both technical and societal points of view.

**4. Application of the framework: a case study of teleworking**

The practice of “Teleworking”, enabled by the diffusion of informa­
tion and communication technologies and widely adopted during the
Covid-19 pandemic, is used to demonstrate the SEED-STEM coupled
framework for Switzerland and highlights its key features, such as: the
relevance of social interactions for the spread of practices over the time
horizon; the relationship between social practices, energy consumption,
and technology adoption; the importance of considering cross-sectoral
interdependencies when analyzing technology adoptions by users; the
impact of consumers behavior on the energy system configuration of a
country. The main inputs needed to initialize the SEED model for
Switzerland are provided in the supplementary material together with
their sources.


-----


_4.1. Calibration and validation of SEED_

The SEED model’s calibration was performed using the Behavior­
Space software tool provided in NetLogo [67], which allows for varying
the input parameters over several simulation runs systematically and
recording each run’s results. Two different calibrations are performed.
The first calibration step concerns the parameters driving the social
network interactions (eq. A.30) of Households: the speed of adaptation
and the upper bound of the confidence level (threshold value).
To calibrate these parameters, three waves of the SHEDS survey
(2016–2018) were used. The question regarding the “environmental
awareness” of respondents was used because it is the only one available
as a time series in SHEDS. The “environmental awareness” is one of the
preferences used by Households to decide on the adoption of practices
and technologies, as explained in Table 2. The distribution of the an­
swers (ranked between 0 and 1) was extrapolated for the three waves of
SHEDS.
The distribution of this preference among Households agents of SEED
for the period 2016–2018 is recorded for different combinations of the
two parameters, and it was compared with the distribution identified by
the respondents of the SHEDS survey over the same period. The com­
bination of values resulting in a distribution that best fits the SHEDS
over three years was selected. This leads to a value of 0.1 for the speed of
adoption and 0.17 for the threshold value.
The second calibration step concerns the parameters of the different
utility functions for Households for technology adoption. A similar
approach as the one described in the first step has been followed to
calibrate the weight parameters, but in this case, eight years are used
(2010–2018). In particular, the weights of the cost, preference, infra­
structure, and market components were systematically varied from 0.05
to 1 in steps of 0.05. The adoption rate of each transport and residential
technology for 2010–2018 identified in SEED was then compared with
the official statistics of Switzerland. The Root Mean Squared Error
(RMSE) is calculated for each technology, and the combinations of pa­
rameters with the lowest RMSE are selected to initialize the weights (see
Table 3). The years 2019–2021 are used to validate the model,
comparing the technology adoption of SEED with the Swiss new sales
dataset. The error between the real data and SEED simulation is lower
than 10% (see Appendix C).
Concerning the utility function for the adoption of teleworking, its
weights are calibrated and validated using the official statistic for tele­
working in Switzerland, where the number of employees performing the
social practice “Teleworking” increased to 23.8% in 2018 (compared to
18.2% in 2013) [92].

_4.2. Scenario definitions_

Two scenarios are compared to analyze the implications of the social
practice of “Teleworking” on Switzerland’s energy consumption and
energy system configuration by assuming a different growth of the
digital indicators described in section 3.1.1. (Table 4).
Baseline scenario: represents a “business as usual” situation for the
spread and evolution of teleworking by following the observed trends of
the last decade [92].
Digital scenario: it assumes that the “intensity of ICT use” grows by
10% per year, following the growth experienced during the COVID-19
pandemic [92].

Table 4 shows the assumptions used to model teleworking and its
energy savings potential. The evolution of digitalization in SEED is
driven by three parameters, as explained in paragraph 3.1.1. These three
parameters, representing the essential elements to drive the digital
evolution of a country, are assumed based on the observed trends of the
last decade for the Baseline scenario, while the Digital scenario follows
the growth experienced during the COVID-19 pandemic. Assumptions
on the impact of teleworking on energy consumption include the in­
crease in heating and electricity demand induced by one day of


**Table 3**
Calibration of utility function parameters for Household agents.

Decision Nomenclature Description Calibration
process value (RMSE =
0.0669)


Residential _Behz_ Calibration value of the
component preference in the
utility function for
residential technology
adoption

_Behz_ Calibration value of the
component cost in the utility
function for residential
technology adoption

_Behz_ Calibration value of the
component infrastructure in
the utility function for
residential technology
adoption

_Behz_ Calibration value of the
component market in the
utility function for
residential technology
adoption

Transport _Behz_ Calibration value of the
component preference in the
utility function for transport
technology adoption

_Behz_ Calibration value of the
component cost in the utility
function for transport
technology adoption

_Behz_ Calibration value of the
component infrastructure in
the utility function for
transport technology
adoption

_Behz_ Calibration value of the
component market in the
utility function for transport
technology adoption

Electricity _Behz_ Calibration value of the
component preference in the
utility function for electricity
technology adoption

_Behz_ Calibration value of the
component cost in the utility
function for electricity
technology adoption

_Behz_ Calibration value of the
component infrastructure in
the utility function for
electricity technology
adoption

_Behz_ Calibration value of the
component market in the
utility function for
teleworking adoption

Teleworking _Aipu_ Calibration value of the
component preference in the
utility function for
teleworking adoption

_Aipu_ Calibration value of the
component cost in the utility
function for teleworking
adoption

_Aiup_ Calibration value of the
component infrastructure in
the utility function for
teleworking adoption

_Aiup_ Calibration value of the
component market in the
utility function for
teleworking adoption


0.75

0.15

0.8

0.4

0.75

0.2

0.8

0.1

1

0.15

0.8

0.4

0.8

1

0.5

0.2


-----


**Table 4**
Summary of the assumptions to perform a "What-If?" Analysis with the SEEDSTEM framework for Baseline and Digital scenarios. Sources:[1. ] [92],[2 ] [56],[3 ]

[93],[4 ][35].

Baseline Digital Impact on the
endogenous mechanism
of SEED

Digital evolution assumptions
Growth in “intensity of 2% per 10% per Impact on the number of
ICT use” of year year hours worked as
teleworking[1 ] teleworking

Growth of ICT budget of 0.2% per 1% per Impact on the number of
companies year year people performing
teleworking and on the
hours worked as
teleworking
Growth in the 2% per 10% per Impact on the number of
probability of having a year year people that can perform
digital job teleworking (digital job)

Assumptions on teleworking
Number of hours as 2 h per 4 h per Impact on internet data
videoconferencing remote remote demand and electricity
working working consumption
day day

Change in residential Increase of 4% per remote Impact on the cost
heating demand[2 ] working day component of the utility

function of Households
for technology
investment
Change in residential Increase of 2% per remote Impact on the cost
electricity demand[2 ] working day component of the utility

function of Households
for technology
investment
Reduction of office space Up to 25% Impact on the cost
for companies[3 ] component of the utility

function of Firms,
impact on the energy
services demand
Policies and target assumptions
CO2 emissions target[4 ] 2030: 24 Mt/CO2 Impact on exogenous
2040: 14 Mt/CO2 energy prices over time
2050: 0 Mt/CO2 (input from coupling

with STEM).
Impact on the decision
process of Households
and Firms (impact on
cost component)
Building emissions Not Implemented /
standards and
transport emissions
standards


Oil boilers and electric No new installations for
boilers new houses (houses built
after 2010)


Impact on the
infrastructure
component of the utility
function of Households
for technology
investments. It deters
Households from
investing in oil boilers
and electric boilers


teleworking (+4% of heating and +2% of electricity per each remote
working day), the internet data demand intensity in terms of Giga Bytes
for hours of videoconference meetings. For each Firm, the adoption of
digital business as remote working is connected with potential savings in
heating and electricity demands due to the reduction of office space

[93]. Finally, both scenarios are normative and achieve net-zero CO2
emissions in 2050 from the fuel combustion and industrial processes
([94,95]).
Social aspects affecting households’ decision processes, such as at­
titudes, opinions, lifestyle characteristics, and personal values, are
introduced into SEED in terms of components of the multi-criteria
functions of Households to analyze lifestyle changes induced by digita­
lization. However, the sociological implication of these lifestyle changes


cannot be derived from the model. Implications on health, satisfaction,
and career opportunities related to teleworking, for example, are not
analyzed, as they are out-of-scope for the model. Similarly, rebound
effects that are not energy-related (e.g., different use of personal time for
households, relocation to rural areas enabled by virtualization of ser­
vices, etc.) are not captured in this application.

**5. Results and discussion**

_5.1. Social network interactions_

The adoption of teleworking in the tertiary sector for the two sce­
narios is shown in Fig. 5. The number of people performing teleworking
in the Baseline scenario will slightly increase over time, in contrast to the
Digital scenario. In the Digital scenario, the share of teleworkers in
digital jobs will increase up to 75% in 2050, while in the Baseline, it
stabilizes at 60% (Fig. 6). This result can be explained by the decision
mechanism in SEED. The utility function for adopting a social practice is
influenced by the preferences and the market share components. The
market component considers the spread of social practice in the social
networks of the Household agent, while the preference component is
updated by interacting with Households performing the practice in the
social networks. Suppose a small number of Households are allowed to
perform the practice, as in the Baseline scenario. In that case, the
practice of teleworking does not gain a critical mass in society, and the
diffusion process stagnates. In the Digital scenario, the higher number of
digital jobs increases the opportunity for Households to exchange ideas
and preferences with teleworkers. As shown in Fig. 6, the adoption of
teleworking gains higher spread into society, and it is not related
anymore to the number of people with digital jobs, becoming an
accepted practice coexisting with the conventional practice of going to
work.
By considering social interactions and the role of social networks in
the spread of teleworking in society, SEED demonstrates that the
adoption of teleworking by more than 40% of the population is needed
to sustain its spread over time. This adoption level can only be achieved
if digital job opportunities increase over time, underlining the need for a
digital evolution of society in terms of job types and opportunities.
The yellow line of Fig. 5 shows the endogenous evolution of tele­
working days over time. The average share of working days performed
as teleworking is stable at 20% in Baseline (1 day per week), while it
increases to 80% in Digital (4 days per week). The energy savings that
teleworking can bring to Firms depend on the number of teleworkers
and the number of days they are willing to perform teleworking. While
in the Baseline scenario, teleworking stagnates as a business model for
Firms, in Digital, it constantly gains share when at least 60% of the
employees perform teleworking for two days per week. The attractive­
ness of teleworking for Firms increases further when at least 70% of the
employees are willing to perform teleworking for three days.
The results from SEED show that future teleworking scenarios need
to consider the benefits and losses a company will have to face to exploit
digital business and its interdependencies with its employees.

_5.2. The role of non-cost-related decision factors_

Two Household agents are compared for the two scenarios to
demonstrate the role of social values and interactions on the adoption
mechanism for social practices. They belong to the same income group
and have digital jobs, but they differ in other socio-demographic attri­
butes, such as lifestyle and values, average commuting distance, and
building period of their houses. Each agent has a different social network
where it can gather information and change preferences about a specific
practice and a different trust in the information it receives. The first
Household is identified as a “High-Achiever” living in a historical
building, interested in new digital opportunities and new technologies
independently of their diffusion into society, while the second one is a


-----


**Fig. 5. The adoption of teleworking for employees of the tertiary sector is shown for the two scenarios. The yellow line (right axis) represent the number of tel­**
eworking days per week allowed on average by Firms in the tertiary sector.

component of the utility function of the High-Achiever increases over
time, despite the economic loss captured by the cost component, driving
the diffusion process. The situation is different for the Middle-Class
agent. Fig. 7d shows that the utility function enables the adoption of
teleworking in 2039 in the Digital scenario. The year of adoption is
identified when the utility function for teleworking is higher than the
utility function for going to work. For this agent, Fig. 7f shows that in the
Digital scenario, the increase in both preference and market components
enables teleworking. The cost component in the digital scenario is pos­
itive, showing the economic benefit of the teleworking practice.
To satisfy the heating demand, the High-Achiever replaces the oil
boiler with a natural gas boiler as soon as possible (Fig. 8b). The limi­
tation of living in a historical building prevents the agent from investing
in new technology, such as heat pumps, despite the increasing cost of
natural gas due to the rising CO2 taxes needed for the carbon neutrality
target. This external limitation leads to increasing residential expendi­
tures for the High-Achiever agent, which offsets the savings obtained by
the reduction in commuting.
In contrast, the Middle-Class agent invests in an electric heat pump in
2035 as it does not face any infrastructure limitations. The highly effi­
cient technology offsets the increased heating costs, leading to a positive
cost component in the utility function when opting for teleworking
(Fig. 8d).
Considering not only the reduction in commuting resulting from
teleworking but also the increase in residential heating and electricity
demands, the SEED-STEM framework provides a complete overview of
the implications of teleworking for households and the energy system.


**Fig. 6. Share of teleworking adoption compared to the number of digital jobs in**
the two scenarios.

“Middle-Class” living in a building constructed in the 2000s, influenced
in its choices by the choices of its social network. The High-Achiever
adopts teleworking in 2023 in both scenarios, showing a utility func­
tion for teleworking higher than the utility function for going to work,
with an increase in the value of the utility function in the Digital sce­
nario (Fig. 7a). Fig. 7c shows that in the Digital scenario, the market


_5.3. Energy system implications: the coupled framework_

As previously discussed, teleworking reduces commuting and gen­
erates savings for Households. The extent to which the additional sav­
ings are used to reinvest in cleaner and more efficient technologies
depends on agents’ decision process. Overall, the Digital scenario shows
an increase in the adoption of electric heat pumps by the population
compared to the Baseline, while no difference is observed in the in­
vestment in transport technologies between scenarios. Compared to the


-----


**Fig. 7. Panels a and d show the utility functions for practice adoptions for the two Households for different scenarios. The radar graphs of panels b and e show the**
utility function components of each Household in 2050 for the Baseline scenario, while panels c and f show the values of the utility components for the Digi­
tal scenario.


Baseline scenario, the teleworking practice in Digital decreases the final
energy demand in 2050 by 3 PJ in tertiary sectors and by 3 PJ in
transport. However, it increases the final energy demand in residential
by 6 PJ.
These changes impact the configuration of the energy system,
changing the energy supply and imports. The main changes occur in the
transition period 2025–2035. The increased electrification in the resi­
dential sector lowers the consumption of biomass and gas used by the


system to satisfy the heating demand. Visible in the increase in oil im­
ports is the rebound effect of telecommuting in the residential sector,
reflecting the limitation of some agents in installing more efficient
technologies to counter the increase in heating demand, discussed in the
previous section. The reduced energy demand lowers hydrogen pro­
duction and imports, reducing the production of biodiesel and syngas,
and impacting the electricity supply (Fig. 9).
The cumulative undiscounted cost of the energy system reduces by 9


-----


**Fig. 8. Heating demand, residential technology adoption, and annualized cost for different agents and different scenarios. The residential heating demand is stable**
over time in the Baseline scenario for the High-Achiever agents (8a), while it increases over time in the Digital scenario (8b). In the Digital scenario, it is possible to
observe the increase in the teleworking days represented by the rise in the heating demand in 2026, 2032, and 2045. The Middle-class agent adopts teleworking in
2034 in the Digital scenario (8d), moving to three days per week of teleworking in 2045.


Billion CHF, mainly achieved between 2025 and 2035 (Table 5).

**6. Conclusions**

In this manuscript, a novel socio-techno-economic energy model is
demonstrated for the case study of teleworking in Switzerland. The
coupled SEED-STEM framework shows that the economic benefit of
teleworking is dependent on the possibility of investing in efficient
technologies in the transport and residential sectors. Combining
Households’ heterogeneity with a cross-sectoral decision process, the
SEED model alone allows for an in-depth analysis of limitations and
incentives to strengthen the positive implications of this practice for the
clean energy transition. However, the coupled framework SEED-STEM
shows that in the long run, any gains in emissions attained by the
reduction of commuting and energy demand for transport and the en­
ergy savings achieved in the tertiary sector are offset by the increase in
the residential heating demand. This highlights the need for a holistic
assessment of teleworking. For example, an increase in teleworking days
should be complemented by incentives for investing in new technologies


and renovation practices in old buildings. Hence, the SEED-STEM
framework enables long-term studies with a comprehensive focus
covering the interdependencies between employees, employers, and
policymaking in the discussion on the energy savings potential of tele­
working, a research gap also identified by O’Brien et al. [96].
The coupling results show how an energy system model like STEM
can benefit from including the transition pathways analyzed by SEED. It
shows how the transition pathways toward 2050 can change according
to the investment decisions of the population. SEED-STEM assures that a
carbon-free energy system configuration is feasible from a technical and
societal perspective.
The coupled framework provides insights into scenarios where the
upfront cost for energy-efficient technology is not affordable by the
population, providing suggestions on the incentives needed. This is
because SEED can simulate different types of policies on energy tech­
nology adoption, such as financial incentives (subsidies, soft loans),
financial disincentives (penalties), bans, and mandates, as well as pol­
icies to raise awareness on the population about the energy transition
(information campaigns, educational training). For example, a ban can


-----


**Fig. 9. Results from STEM after the models’ coupling and convergence. In the**
transition period 2025–2035, represented by the milestone year 2030 in STEM,
the energy system model to reduce the consumption from biomass and biofuels,
increasing the use of environmental heat as primary energy consumption (PJ).
This reduction allows for a savings of 9 Billion CHF over the period, around 1%
of the annual cost.

**Table 5**
Energy demands ad energy prices of the two different scenarios for the mile­
stones years of STEM.

Energy demand Scenario 2030 2040 2050

Transport energy services demand Baseline 64.1 65.2 64.8
(Billion vkm) Digital 60.9 60.2 59.6
Transport final energy demand (PJ) Baseline 72.70 44.133 43.0
Digital 70.28 40.72 39.4
Residential energy services demand Baseline 219.7 230.6 238.7
(PJ) Digital 221.4 234.0 243.0
Residential final energy demand (PJ) Baseline 237.83 246.25 254.94
Digital 239.39 249.75 260.87
Services energy services demand (PJ) Baseline 134.1 130.2 124.2
Digital 131.1 126.6 119.5
Services final energy demand (PJ) Baseline 140.63 129.24 107.18
Digital 137.97 127.31 103.60
Undiscounted cumulative system cost (Billion CHF)
Cumulative undiscounted annual Baseline 875.93 567.31 1166.89
system cost (Billion CHF) Digital 865.83 567.35 1167.80

be translated into a negative coefficient for the infrastructure compo­
nent in Households’ utility function that constitutes the banned tech­
nology less likely to be selected.
While the results highlight the main features of the SEED model and
the coupled framework, limitations related to the methodology must
also be noted. The SEED model has national spatial resolution with no
intra-annual detail. This design was selected to facilitate the coupling
with STEM and reflects the data availability. However, it does not favor
a detailed representation of technologies or social practices requiring
hourly resolution. Furthermore, the aggregation to a national scale
bounds the focus of the model. International energy trade is exogenously
provided together with the interaction of cross-border energy supply
infrastructure, while the influence of international trends affecting the


digitalization spread on the Swiss society is neglected in the current
version of the model.
SEED relies on surveys for its parametrization, which are not always
available and generate the need for further assumptions concerning
preferences and users’ behavior. The limitation of the data availability is
recognized as the most significant source of uncertainties for ABM
models concerning their validation. A connection with a living lab could
allow for better validation, also providing insight into possible rebound
effects and the emergence of new behaviors. Neglecting rebound effects
increases the uncertainties on the quantification of impacts the practice
can have on the energy system. Still, living labs cannot provide infor­
mation on the changes in the ABM parameters over time. A collaboration
between social scientists and energy system modelers can be pursued to
improve the framework regarding the evolution of these parameters
over time.
Finally, the selection of the convergence criterion is based on the
current parametrization of the model used to analyze net-zero scenarios.
An in-depth analysis is needed to understand the model’s behavior with
different parametrizations. Such complex analysis, which requires high
computational power, is difficult to perform with the current NetLogo
software used to develop SEED, which, although well-suited [97] to
develop a model from scratch, presents computational limitations [98].
The impact of new lifestyles enabled by ICTs (e.g., teleworking, elearning, e-services) on energy consumption patterns for a long time
period will be addressed with future application of the framework pre­
sented in this paper.

**Author contribution statement**

Lidia Stermieri: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis,
Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing - Revision, Visualization.
Tom Kober: Review & Editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition.
Thomas J. Schmidt: Supervision, Writing – review & editing Russell
McKenna: Review & Editing. Evangelos Panos: Conceptualization,
Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Supervision,
Funding acquisition.

**Declaration of competing interest**

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

**Data availability**

Data will be made available on request.

**Acknowledgment**

The study benefitted from the access provided to the SHEDS data­
base. The research published in this article was carried out with the
support of the Swiss Federal Office of Energy (SFOE) as part of the
SWEET project SURE. The authors bear sole responsibility for the con­
clusions and the results presented in this publication.

**Appendix A. Supplementary data**

[Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2023.101224)
[org/10.1016/j.esr.2023.101224.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2023.101224)

**References**

[1] M. Friedli, L. Kaufmann, F. Paganini, and R. Kyburz, Energy Efficiency of the
Internet of Things, Technology and Energy Assessment Report Prepared for IEA 4E
EDNA, 2016.


-----


[[2] N. Roztocki, P. Soja, H.R. Weistroffer, The role of information and communication](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref2)
[technologies in socioeconomic development: towards a multi-dimensional](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref2)
[framework, Inf. Technol. Dev. 25 (2) (2019) 171–183.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref2)

[[3] V.C. Coroam˘a, F. Mattern, Digital rebound – Why digitalization will not redeem us](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref3)
[our environmental sins, in: CEUR Workshop Proceedings 2382, 2019.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref3)

[[4] United Nations Framework, Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), The Paris](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref4)
[Agreement, 2016.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref4)

[[5] P. H¨artel, D. Ghosh, Modelling heat pump systems in low-carbon energy systems](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref5)
[with significant cross-sectoral integration, IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 37 (4) (2022)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref5)
[3259–3273.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref5)

[[6] J.C.T. Bieser, L.M. Hilty, Indirect Effects of the Digital Transformation on](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref6)
[Environmental Sustainability: Methodological Challenges in Assessing the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref6)
[Greenhouse Gas Abatement Potential of ICT, 2018, 68-53.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref6)

[[7] Y. Arushanyan, E. Ekener-Petersen, G. Finnveden, Lessons learned – review of LCAs](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref7)
[for ICT products and services, Comput. Ind. 65 (2) (2014) 211–234.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref7)

[[8] L.D. Taylor, Forecasting the internet, in: D.G. Loomis, L.D. Taylor (Eds.),](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref8)
[Forecasting the Internet: Understanding the Explosive Growth of Data](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref8)
[Communications, Springer US, Boston, MA, 2002, pp. 5–9.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref8)

[9] M.P. Liborio, T.M. Machado-Coelho, P. Bernardes, A.M.C. Machado, P.Y. Ekel, G. ´
L. Soares, Forecasting Internet Demand Using Public Data: A Case Study in Brazil 6,
[IEEE Access, 2018, pp. 65974–65980, https://doi.org/10.1109/](https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2878130)
[ACCESS.2018.2878130.](https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2878130)

[[10] L. Carter, F. Belanger, The utilization of e-government services: citizen trust,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref10)
[innovation and acceptance factors, Inf. Syst. J. 15 (1) (2005) 5–25.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref10)

[11] L. Stermieri, T. Kober, T. J. Schmidt, R. McKenna, and E. Panos, “‘Quantifying the
implications of behavioral changes induced by digitalization on energy transition:
A systematic review of methodological approaches,’” Energy Res. Soc. Sci., vol. 97,
p. 102961, Mar. 2023.

[[12] R. Kannan, H. Turton, Switzerland energy transition scenarios – Development and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref12)
[application of the Swiss TIMES Energy system Model (STEM), Final Report to Swiss](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref12)
[Federal Office of Energy, Bern, 2014.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref12)

[[13] IEA-ETSAP, TIMES Model, https://iea-etsap.org/index.php/etsap-tools/mod](https://iea-etsap.org/index.php/etsap-tools/model-generators/times)
[el-generators/times.](https://iea-etsap.org/index.php/etsap-tools/model-generators/times)

[[14] M. Howells, et al., OSeMOSYS: the open source energy modeling system, Energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref14)
[Pol. 39 (10) (2011) 5850–5870.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref14)

[[15] R. McKenna, V. Bertsch, K. Mainzer, W. Fichtner, Combining local preferences with](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref15)
[multi-criteria decision analysis and linear optimization to develop feasible energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref15)
[concepts in small communities, Eur. J. Oper. Res. 268 (3) (Aug. 2018) 1092–1110.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref15)

[[16] I. Røpke, T.H. Christensen, Energy impacts of ICT – insights from an everyday life](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref16)
[perspective, Telematics Inf. 29 (4) (2012) 348–361.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref16)

[[17] Y. Yamaguchi, A practice-theory-based analysis of historical changes in household](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref17)
[practices and energy demand: a case study from Japan, Technol. Forecast. Soc.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref17)
[Change 145 (2019) 207–218.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref17)

[[18] E. Shove, G. Walker, What is energy for? Social practice and energy demand,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref18)
[Theor. Cult. Soc. 31 (5) (2014) 41–58.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref18)

[[19] A. Warde, Consumption and theories of practice, J. Consum. Cult. 5 (2) (2016)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref19)
[131–153.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref19)

[[20] M. Coleman, N. Brown, A. Wright, S.K. Firth, Information, communication and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref20)
[entertainment appliance use - Insights from a UK household study, Energy Build.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref20)
[54 (2012) 61–72.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref20)

[[21] M. Pothitou, R.F. Hanna, K.J. Chalvatzis, ICT entertainment appliances’ impact on](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref21)
[domestic electricity consumption, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 69 (2017)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref21)
[843–853.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref21)

[[22] J. Torriti, Understanding the timing of energy demand through time use data: time](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref22)
[of the day dependence of social practices, Energy Res. Social Sci. 25 (2017) 37–47.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref22)

[[23] J. Morley, K. Widdicks, M. Hazas, Digitalisation, energy and data demand: the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref23)
[impact of Internet traffic on overall and peak electricity consumption, Energy Res.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref23)
[Social Sci. 38 (2018) 128–137.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref23)

[[24] A. Grubler, et al., A low energy demand scenario for meeting the 1.5 [◦]c target and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref24)
[sustainable development goals without negative emission technologies, Nat.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref24)
[Energy 3 (6) (2018) 515–527.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref24)

[[25] Demand, services and social aspects of mitigation, in: Climate Change 2022 -](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref25)
[Mitigation of Climate Change, 2023, pp. 503–612.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref25)

[[26] S. Pfenninger, A. Hawkes, J. Keirstead, Energy systems modeling for twenty-first](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref26)
[century energy challenges, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 33 (2014) 74–86.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref26)

[[27] E. Fragni`ere, R. Kanala, F. Moresino, A. Reveiu, I. Smeureanu, Coupling techno-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref27)
[economic energy models with behavioral approaches, Oper. Res. 17 (2) (2017)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref27)
[633–647.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref27)

[28] Hinker, C. Hemkendreis, E. Drewing, S. Marz, D. I. Hidalgo Rodríguez, and J. M. A. ¨
Myrzik, “A novel conceptual model facilitating the derivation of agent-based
models for analyzing socio-technical optimality gaps in the energy domain,”
Energy, vol. 137, pp. 1219–1230, 2017.

[[29] E. Trutnevyte, Does cost optimization approximate the real-world energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref29)
[transition? Energy 106 (2016) 182–193.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref29)

[[30] E. Trutnevyte, W. McDowall, J. Tomei, I. Keppo, Energy scenario choices: Insights](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref30)
[from a retrospective review of UK energy futures, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 55](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref30)
[(2016) 326–337.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref30)

[[31] S. Bolwig, et al., Climate-friendly but Socially Rejected Energy-Transition](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref31)
[Pathways: the Integration of Techno-Economic and Socio-Technical Approaches in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref31)
[the Nordic-Baltic Region, vol. 67, Energy Research & Social Science, 2020.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref31)

[[32] Francis G.N. Li, Actors behaving badly: exploring the modelling of non-optimal](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref32)
[behaviour in energy transitions, Energy Strategy Rev. 15 (2017) 57–71.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref32)

[[33] J.-M. Cayla, N. Maïzi, Integrating household behavior and heterogeneity into the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref33)
[TIMES-Households model, Appl. Energy 139 (2015) 56–67.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref33)



[[34] H.E. Daly, K. Ramea, A. Chiodi, S. Yeh, M. Gargiulo, B.O. Gallachoir, Incorporating ´](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref34)
[travel behaviour and travel time into TIMES energy system models, Appl. Energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref34)
[135 (2014) 429–439.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref34)

[[35] E. Panos, T. Kober, R. Kannan, S. Hirschberg. Long-term Energy Transformation](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref35)
[Pathways Integrated Scenario Analysis with the Swiss Times Energy Systems](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref35)
[Model, Joint Activity Scenarios and Modelling, Paul Scherrer Institute, 2021.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref35)

[[36] E. Panos, R. Kannan, S. Hirschberg, T. Kober, An assessment of energy system](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref36)
[transformation pathways to achieve net-zero carbon dioxide emissions in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref36)
[Switzerland, Commun. Earth Environ. 4 (1) (2023).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref36)

[[37] D. Huckebrink, V. Bertsch, Integrating behavioural aspects in energy system](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref37)
[modelling—a review, Energies 14 (15) (2021).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref37)

[[38] T. Zhang, D. Zhang, Agent-based simulation of consumer purchase decision-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref38)
[making and the decoy effect, J. Bus. Res. 60 (8) (2007) 912–922.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref38)

[[39] A.H. Auchincloss, L.M. Garcia, Brief introductory guide to agent-based modeling](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref39)
[and an illustration from urban health research, Cad. Saúde Pública 31 (Suppl 1)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref39)
[(2015) 65–78. Suppl 1.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref39)

[[40] V. Rai, S.A. Robinson, Agent-based Modeling of Energy Technology Adoption:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref40)
[Empirical Integration of Social, Behavioral, Economic, and Environmental Factors,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref40)
[vol. 70, Environmental Modelling & Software, 2015, pp. 163–177.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref40)

[[41] V. Rai, A.D. Henry, Agent-based modelling of consumer energy choices, Nat. Clim.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref41)
[Change 6 (6) (2016) 556–562.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref41)

[[42] J. Sachs, Y. Meng, S. Giarola, A. Hawkes, An agent-based model for energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref42)
[investment decisions in the residential sector, Energy 172 (2019) 752–768.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref42)

[[43] Z. Zhang, et al., Combining agent-based residential demand modeling with design](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref43)
[optimization for integrated energy systems planning and operation, Appl. Energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref43)
[263 (2020).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref43)

[[44] M. Xu, B. Allenby, J. Kim, R. Kahhat, A dynamic agent-based analysis for the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref44)
[environmental impacts of conventional and novel book retailing, Environ. Sci.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref44)
[Technol. 43 (8) (2009) 2851–2857.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref44)

[[45] G. Sissa, An Agent Based approach for sustainable ICT services toward](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref45)
[environmental sustainability, in: 6th IEEE International Conference on Digital](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref45)
[Ecosystems and Technologies, DEST), 2012.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref45)

[[46] E. Damiani, G. Sissa, An agent based model of environmental awareness and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref46)
[limited resource consumption, in: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref46)
[on Management of Emergent Digital EcoSystems, MEDES 2013, 2013, pp. 54–59.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref46)

[[47] T. Julien Walzberg, N. Merveille, M. Cheriet, An agent-based model to evaluate](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref47)
[smart homes sustainability potential, in: IEEE International Symposium on](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref47)
[Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, PIMRC, 2018.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref47)

[[48] J. Walzberg, T. Dandres, N. Merveille, M. Cheriet, R. Samson, Assessing](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref48)
[behavioural change with agent-based life cycle assessment: Application to smart](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref48)
[homes, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 111 (2019) 365–376.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref48)

[[49] J. Walzberg, T. Dandres, N. Merveille, M. Cheriet, R. Samson, Should we fear the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref49)
[rebound effect in smart homes? Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 125 (2020).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref49)

[[50] Q.M. Tenailleau, C. Tannier, G. Vuidel, P. Tissandier, N. Bernard, Assessing the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref50)
[impact of telework enhancing policies for reducing car emissions: Exploring](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref50)
[calculation methods for data-missing urban areas – Example of a medium-sized](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref50)
[European city (Besançon, France), Urban Clim. 38 (2021).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref50)

[[51] T. Balke, T. Roberts, M. Xenitidou, N. Gilbert, Modelling Energy-Consuming Social](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref51)
[Practices as Agents, in: Advances in Computational Social Sciene and Social](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref51)
[Simulation, 2014.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref51)

[[52] K. Narasimhan, et al., Using ABM to clarify and refine social practice theory, in:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref52)
[Advances in Social Simulation 2015, 2017, pp. 307–319.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref52)

[[53] T.R. Schatzki, Social Practices: A Wittgensteinian Approach to Human Activity and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref53)
[the Social, Cambridge University Press, 1996.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref53)

[[54] A. McMeekin, D. Southerton, Sustainability transitions and final consumption:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref54)
[practices and socio-technical systems, Technol. Anal. Strat. Manag. 24 (4) (2012)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref54)
[345–361.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref54)

[[55] Y. Strengers, Peak electricity demand and social practice theories: reframing the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref55)
[role of change agents in the energy sector, Energy Pol. 44 (2012) 226–234.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref55)

[[56] J. Palm, K. Ellegård, M. Hellgren, A cluster analysis of energy-consuming activities](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref56)
[in everyday life, Build. Res. Inf. 46 (1) (2017) 99–113.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref56)

[[57] J. Naus, B.J.M. Van Vliet, A. Hendriksen, Households as change agents in a Dutch](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref57)
[smart energy transition: On power, privacy and participation, Energy Res. Soc. Sci.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref57)
[9 (2015) 125–136.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref57)

[[58] B.J.M. Van Vliet, J. Naus, R. Smale, G. Spaargaren, Emerging e-practices,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref58)
[information flows and the home: A sociological research agenda on smart energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref58)
[systems, in: Systems, 2016, pp. 217–233.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref58)

[[59] P. Suski, M. Speck, C. Liedtke, Promoting sustainable consumption with LCA – a](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref59)
[social practice based perspective, J. Clean. Prod. (2021) 283.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref59)

[[60] A. Horta, S. Fonseca, M. Truninger, N. Nobre, A. Correia, Mobile phones, batteries](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref60)
[and power consumption: An analysis of social practices in Portugal, Energy Res.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref60)
[Soc. Sci. 13 (2016) 15–23.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref60)

[[61] J. Spinney, N. Green, K. Burningham, G. Cooper, D. Uzzell, Are we sitting](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref61)
[comfortably? Domestic imaginaries, laptop practices, and energy use, Environ.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref61)
[Plan. A 44 (11) (2012) 2629–2645.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref61)

[[62] C. Lord, et al., Demand in my pocket: mobile devices and the data connectivity](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref62)
[marshalled in support of everyday practice, in: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref62)
[ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2015, pp. 2729–2738.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref62)

[[63] F. Corsini, R. Laurenti, F. Meinherz, F.P. Appio, L. Mora, The advent of practice](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref63)
[theories in research on sustainable consumption: Past, current and future](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref63)
[directions of the field, Sustain. 11 (2) (2019).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref63)

[[64] A. Fattahi, J. Sijm, A. Faaij, A systemic approach to analyze integrated energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref64)
[system modeling tools: a review of national models, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref64)
[133 (2020), 110195.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref64)


-----


[[65] M. Fodstad, et al., Next Frontiers in Energy System Modelling: A Review on](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref65)
[Challenges and the State of the Art, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref65)
[2022, p. 160.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref65)

[[66] E. De Cian, et al., Actors, decision-making, and institutions in quantitative system](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref66)
[modelling, Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change (2020) 151.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref66)

[[67] U. Wilensky, NetLogo, Center for Connected Learning and Computer-Based](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref67)
[Modeling, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 1999.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref67)

[[68] A. Hall, K. Virrantaus, Visualizing the workings of agent-based models: diagrams as](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref68)
[a tool for communication and knowledge acquisition, Comput. Environ. Urban](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref68)
[Syst. 58 (2016) 1–11.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref68)

[[69] T. Balke, T. Roberts, M. Xenitidou, N. Gilbert, Model Description: Social Practice](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref69)
[Model (2014).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref69)

[[70] Portulans Institute, The Network Readiness Index 2019: towards a Future-Ready](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref70)
[Society, Washington D.C., USA, 2019.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref70)

[[71] Frequency Distribution (Net Monthly Wage), Full- and Part-Time Employees by](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref71)
[Wage-Level Class and Gender FSO Swiss Earnings Structure Survey, 2022.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref71)

[72] Degr´e de formation de la population r´esidante permanente selon le statut sur le
march´e du travail et la nationalit´e, Federal Statistics Office (FSO), Editor.

[73] Standige Wohnbev¨ [olkerung nach Alter, Kanton, Bezirk und Gemeinde, Bundesamt ¨](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref73)
[für Statistik (BFS), 2021.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref73)

[[74] S. Weber, et al., Swiss household energy demand survey (SHEDS): objectives,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref74)
[design, and implementation, in: S. CREST (Ed.), Work Package 2: Change of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref74)
[Behavior SCCER CREST, October, 2017.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref74)

[[75] E. Panos, S. Margelou, Long-term solar photovoltaics penetration in single- and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref75)
[two-family houses in Switzerland, Energies 12 (13) (2019).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref75)

[[76] Personnes actives occup´ees par sections ´economiques et selon la nationalit´e, in:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref76)
[Federal Statistics Office, FSO), 2020.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref76)

[[77] JASM Data Platform, Joint Activity Scenarios and Modelling, JASM), 2019.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref77)

[[78] Tagesdistanz, Tagesunterwegszeit und Anzahl Etappen nach Verkehrsmittelklasse](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref78)
[und Zweck - Schweiz, Federal Statistics Office (FSO), 2015.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref78)

[[79] Enquˆete sur le budget des m´enages, 2015–2017, Revenus et d´epenses des m´enages](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref79)
[selon la classe de revenu, Federal Statistics Office (FSO), 2018.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref79)

[[80] Federal Statistical Office, General Classification of Economic Activities, NOGA), 2008.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref80)

[[81] OECD, Dataset, in: Input-Output Tables (IOTs) 2021, OECD Statistics, 2021. https](https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=IOTS_2021)
[://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=IOTS_2021.](https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=IOTS_2021)

[[82] K.S. Rolf Moeckel, Michael Wegener, Creating a synthetic population, in: 8th](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref82)
[International Conference on Computers in Urban Planning and Urban Management](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref82)
[(CUPUM), Sendai, Japan, May 2003.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref82)



[83] Iman (2023). lhsgeneral(pd,correlation,n) (https://www.mathworks.com/
matlabcentral/fileexchange/56384-lhsgeneral-pd-correlation-n), MATLAB Central
File Exchange. Retrieved September 29, 2023.

[[84] K. Nguyen, R. Schumann, On developing a more comprehensive decision-making](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref99)
[architecture for empirical social research: Agent-based simulation of mobility](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref99)
[demands in Switzerland, in: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref99)
[subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref99)
[Bioinformatics) vol. 12025, LNAI, 2020, pp. 39–54.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref99)

[[85] A.-K. Hess, R. Samuel, P. Burger, Informing a social practice theory framework](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref85)
[with social-psychological factors for analyzing routinized energy consumption: a](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref85)
[multivariate analysis of three practices, Energy Res. Social Sci. 46 (2018) 183–193.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref85)

[[86] R. Likert, A technique for the measurement of attitudes, Arch. Psychol. 22 140](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref86)
[(1932), 55-55.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref86)

[[87] R. Hegselmann, U. Krause, Opinion dynamics and bounded confidence: models,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref87)
[analysis and simulation, Jasss-the Journal of Artificial Societies and Social](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref87)
[Simulation 5 (3) (2002).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref87)

[[88] G. Holtz, Generating social practices, J. Artif. Soc. Soc. Simulat. 17 (1) (2014) 17.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref88)

[[89] T.B. Battaglino, M. Halderman, E. Laurans. Creating sound policy for digital](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref89)
[learning: the costs of online learning, Thomas B. Fordham Institute. Thomas B.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref89)
[Fordham Institute, 2012, p. 14.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref89)

[[90] C. Borggren, Å. Moberg, M. R¨as¨anen, G. Finnveden, Business meetings at a distance](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref790)

[- Decreasing greenhouse gas emissions and cumulative energy demand? J. Clean.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref790)
[Prod. 41 (2013) 126–139.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref790)

[[91] C.O. Wene, Energy-economics analysis linking the macroeconomic and system](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref791)
[engineering approaches, Energy (1996) 21.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref791)

[92] T´el´etravail a domicile` [, Federal Statistics Office, FSO), 2022. Dataset).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref892)

[[93] T.F. Guerin, Policies to minimise environmental and rebound effects from](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref993)
[telework: a study for Australia, Environ. Innov. Soc. Transit. 39 (2021) 18–33.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref993)

[[94] Federal Office for the Environment, Switzerland’s Long-Term Climate Strategy, 2021.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref94)

[[95] Swiss Federal Office Of Energy, Energy Strategy 2050 after the Popular Vote, 2017.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref95)

[[96] W. O’Brien, F. Yazdani Aliabadi, Does telecommuting save energy? A critical](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref96)
[review of quantitative studies and their research methods, Energy Build. 225](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref96)
[(2020), 110298.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref96)

[[97] Agent-based modelling in economics, in: Lynne Hamill and Nigel Gilbert, first ed.,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref97)
[John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2016. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref97)

[[98] I. Romanowska, S. Crabtree, B. Davies, K. Harris, Agent-based Modeling for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref98)
[Archaeologists. A step-by-step guide for using agent-based modeling in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref98)
[archaeological research (Part I of III), Advances in Archaeological Practice 7 (2)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref98)
[(2019).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2211-467X(23)00174-8/sref98)


-----

