
    You are given parts from a scientific paper, you are tasked with
    extracting information from these parts.
    Here is the text:
    Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

# Energy Strategy Reviews

[journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/esr](https://www.elsevier.com/locate/esr)


## Impacts of digitalization and societal changes on energy transition: a novel socio-techno-economic energy system model

### L. Stermieri [a], T. Kober [a], R. McKenna [d][,][e], T.J. Schmidt [b][,][c], E. Panos [a][,] [* ]

a Paul Scherrer Institute, Laboratory for Energy Systems Analysis, Energy Economics Group, Forschungsstrasse 111, 5232, Villigen PSI, Switzerland
b Paul Scherrer Institute, Research Division Energy & Environment, Forschungsstrasse 111, 5232, Villigen PSI, Switzerland
c ETH Zurich, Institute for Molecular Physical Sciences, Dep. of of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 1-5/10, 8093, Zurich, Switzerland
d Paul Scherrer Institute, Laboratory for Energy Systems Analysis, Forschungsstrasse 111, 5232, Villigen PSI, Switzerland
e ETH Zurich, Chair of Energy Systems Analysis, Institute of Energy and Process Engineering, Dep. of Mechanical and Process Eng., Clausiusstrasse 33, 8092, Zurich,
_Switzerland_


A R T I C L E I N F O

Handling Editor: Mark Howells

_Keywords:_
ICT
Consumer behavior
Social practice
Energy system analysis
Agent-based modeling
Climate target

**1.**1. Introduction**


A B S T R A C T

The increased diffusion of information and communication technologies (ICTs) impacts daily life and economic
growth. It introduces new social practices for households and business models for companies that influence
society and energy infrastructure development. A framework capable of quantifying and analyzing the impact of
digitalization on achieving energy and climate targets, with a focus on behavioral changes induced by ICT, is
currently lacking. In this paper, a new framework is developed that is technology-rich and captures the pref­
erences and behaviors of households and firms in the energy system to assess sustainable energy system con­
figurations that are technically and socially feasible. The framework is designed and demonstrated for
Switzerland. We find, for example, that teleworking in Switzerland reduces commuting demand by 10%, and the
savings in transport expenses can favor the investment in efficient and clean residential technologies to
compensate for the increased residential energy demand due to working at home. This manuscript contributes to
the growing literature of suitable frameworks and case studies to account for the co-evolution of society and
energy systems in achieving the transition to low-carbon economies.


Digital transformation implies a continuous process of change, with
the emergence of new business models, the increase in the use of digital
technologies, and more prevalence of the Internet of Things [1].
The spread of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs)
impacts everyday life and the economy, affects society, and enables new
energy and communication infrastructures [2]. ICTs can mitigate envi­
ronmental degradation [3] and support the energy goals identified by
the Paris Climate Agreement [4]. ICTs can also contribute to achieve
cost-efficient pathways toward carbon neutrality by providing flexibility
to energy vectors coupling through cross-sectoral technologies, recog­
nized as a prerequisite for accomplishing the goal [5]. However, their
impact on energy consumption and supply patterns [6] is not trivial to
assess, increasing the difficulties of implementing targeted policies to
strengthen the beneficial contribution of ICTs and reduce their negative
implications to the environment and energy systems [7]. Furthermore,

 - Corresponding author.
_[E-mail address: evangelos.panos@psi.ch (E. Panos).](mailto:evangelos.panos@psi.ch)_


the absence of retrospective data [8], the need to capture emerging
energy behaviors [9], and the unfamiliarity of some consumer groups
with internet-based services [10] contribute to increasing the challenges
in assessing the implication of ICT applications over a long time horizon.
To quantify the effect that the digital transition will have on future
energy targets, an analysis that is robust in assessing changes in user
behavior and the implications for the changing behaviors on the energy
supply and demand sectors, accounting for cross-sectoral in­
terdependencies, is needed [11].
This paper presents a framework able to represent in detail both
socio-economic structures and energy systems implications connected to
ICT applications. The framework couples the Swiss TIMES Energy Sys­
tems Model (STEM) [12], based on the TIMES energy systems modelling
framework of IEA-ETSAP [13], with a new socio-technical-economic
agent-based model, the so-called Socio-Economic Energy model for
Digitalization – SEED, which has been specifically designed to interact
with it. The SEED model is a first-of-its-kind because it adopts a social


[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2023.101224](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2023.101224)
Received 15 February 2023; Received in revised form 4 September 2023; Accepted 28 September 2023

Available online 14 October 2023
[2211-467X/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)


-----


practice approach to analyze the impact of new lifestyles enabled by
ICTs (e.g., teleworking, e-learning, e-services) on energy consumption
patterns by accounting for agents’ heterogeneity. This allows accounting
for socio-economic and technical aspects affecting the rate of adoption
of technologies. The SEED-STEM framework assesses long-term energy
transition pathways, and the resulting energy system configurations
account for citizens’ preferences, energy supply, resource, and tech­
nology constraints, as well as different energy and climate change
mitigation policies, when calculating energy mixes, investments, and
prices.
The new SEED model has a generic design and can be linked with any
other energy system optimization model based on TIMES or a similar
energy systems modeling framework, e.g., OSEMOSYS [14], RE[3]ASON

[15]. This constitutes a major contribution of this work to the energy
systems modeling research community.
The paper is subdivided as follows: section 2 includes the literature
review and section 3 describes the SEED model and its coupling with
STEM. Section 4 demonstrates the coupled SEED-STEM framework for
the case study of teleworking in Switzerland. The results are shown in
section 5, while the paper concludes in section 6. The detailed mathe­
matical formulation is in the Appendix.

**5. Results and discussion**

_5.1. Social network interactions_

The adoption of teleworking in the tertiary sector for the two sce­
narios is shown in Fig. 5. The number of people performing teleworking
in the Baseline scenario will slightly increase over time, in contrast to the
Digital scenario. In the Digital scenario, the share of teleworkers in
digital jobs will increase up to 75% in 2050, while in the Baseline, it
stabilizes at 60% (Fig. 6). This result can be explained by the decision
mechanism in SEED. The utility function for adopting a social practice is
influenced by the preferences and the market share components. The
market component considers the spread of social practice in the social
networks of the Household agent, while the preference component is
updated by interacting with Households performing the practice in the
social networks. Suppose a small number of Households are allowed to
perform the practice, as in the Baseline scenario. In that case, the
practice of teleworking does not gain a critical mass in society, and the
diffusion process stagnates. In the Digital scenario, the higher number of
digital jobs increases the opportunity for Households to exchange ideas
and preferences with teleworkers. As shown in Fig. 6, the adoption of
teleworking gains higher spread into society, and it is not related
anymore to the number of people with digital jobs, becoming an
accepted practice coexisting with the conventional practice of going to
work.
By considering social interactions and the role of social networks in
the spread of teleworking in society, SEED demonstrates that the
adoption of teleworking by more than 40% of the population is needed
to sustain its spread over time. This adoption level can only be achieved
if digital job opportunities increase over time, underlining the need for a
digital evolution of society in terms of job types and opportunities.
The yellow line of Fig. 5 shows the endogenous evolution of tele­
working days over time. The average share of working days performed
as teleworking is stable at 20% in Baseline (1 day per week), while it
increases to 80% in Digital (4 days per week). The energy savings that
teleworking can bring to Firms depend on the number of teleworkers
and the number of days they are willing to perform teleworking. While
in the Baseline scenario, teleworking stagnates as a business model for
Firms, in Digital, it constantly gains share when at least 60% of the
employees perform teleworking for two days per week. The attractive­
ness of teleworking for Firms increases further when at least 70% of the
employees are willing to perform teleworking for three days.
The results from SEED show that future teleworking scenarios need
to consider the benefits and losses a company will have to face to exploit
digital business and its interdependencies with its employees.

_5.2. The role of non-cost-related decision factors_

Two Household agents are compared for the two scenarios to
demonstrate the role of social values and interactions on the adoption
mechanism for social practices. They belong to the same income group
and have digital jobs, but they differ in other socio-demographic attri­
butes, such as lifestyle and values, average commuting distance, and
building period of their houses. Each agent has a different social network
where it can gather information and change preferences about a specific
practice and a different trust in the information it receives. The first
Household is identified as a “High-Achiever” living in a historical
building, interested in new digital opportunities and new technologies
independently of their diffusion into society, while the second one is a


-----


**6. Conclusions**

In this manuscript, a novel socio-techno-economic energy model is
demonstrated for the case study of teleworking in Switzerland. The
coupled SEED-STEM framework shows that the economic benefit of
teleworking is dependent on the possibility of investing in efficient
technologies in the transport and residential sectors. Combining
Households’ heterogeneity with a cross-sectoral decision process, the
SEED model alone allows for an in-depth analysis of limitations and
incentives to strengthen the positive implications of this practice for the
clean energy transition. However, the coupled framework SEED-STEM
shows that in the long run, any gains in emissions attained by the
reduction of commuting and energy demand for transport and the en­
ergy savings achieved in the tertiary sector are offset by the increase in
the residential heating demand. This highlights the need for a holistic
assessment of teleworking. For example, an increase in teleworking days
should be complemented by incentives for investing in new technologies


and renovation practices in old buildings. Hence, the SEED-STEM
framework enables long-term studies with a comprehensive focus
covering the interdependencies between employees, employers, and
policymaking in the discussion on the energy savings potential of tele­
working, a research gap also identified by O’Brien et al. [96].
The coupling results show how an energy system model like STEM
can benefit from including the transition pathways analyzed by SEED. It
shows how the transition pathways toward 2050 can change according
to the investment decisions of the population. SEED-STEM assures that a
carbon-free energy system configuration is feasible from a technical and
societal perspective.
The coupled framework provides insights into scenarios where the
upfront cost for energy-efficient technology is not affordable by the
population, providing suggestions on the incentives needed. This is
because SEED can simulate different types of policies on energy tech­
nology adoption, such as financial incentives (subsidies, soft loans),
financial disincentives (penalties), bans, and mandates, as well as pol­
icies to raise awareness on the population about the energy transition
(information campaigns, educational training). For example, a ban can


-----


    