
    You are given parts from a scientific paper, you are tasked with
    extracting information from these parts.
    Here is the text:
    Journal of Urban Economics 65 (2009) 91–98


[Contents lists available at ScienceDirect](http://www.ScienceDirect.com/)

# Journal of Urban Economics

[www.elsevier.com/locate/jue](http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jue)


# The impact of residential density on vehicle usage and energy consumption [✩]

## David Brownstone [a][,][∗], Thomas F. Golob [b]

a Department of Economics, 3151 Social Science Plaza, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-5100, USA
b Institute of Transportation Studies, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-3600, USA

a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t


_Article history:_
Received 26 September 2008
Available online 7 October 2008

_JEL classification:_
C30
D12
L92
Q58
R14
R41

_Keywords:_
Residential density
Vehicle use
Vehicle fuel consumption
Simultaneous equations
Self-selection

**1.**1. Introduction and background**


We specify and estimate a joint model of residential density, vehicle use, and fuel consumption that
accounts for both self selection effects and missing data that are related to the endogenous variables.
Our model is estimated on the California subsample of the 2001 U.S. National Household Travel Survey
(NHTS). Comparing two California households that are similar in all respects except residential density,
a lower density of 1000 housing units per square mile (roughly 40% of the weighted sample average)
implies an increase of 1200 miles driven per year (4.8%) and 65 more gallons of fuel used per household
(5.5%). This total effect of residential density on fuel usage is decomposed into two paths of influence.
Increased mileage leads to a difference of 45 gallons, but there is an additional direct effect of density
through lower fleet fuel economy of 20 gallons per year, a result of vehicle type choice.
© 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.


This paper measures the relationship between residential density, household vehicle use, and household vehicle fuel use. It
contributes to a large literature on the impact and/or desirability of low-density suburban development, frequently called “urban
sprawl,” that has dominated development in the U.S. since World
War II. Increased vehicle usage associated with suburbanization or
urban sprawl has been linked to increasing global warming, emissions, and other problems (see Pickrell and Schimek, 1999, and
Kahn, 2000). Urban sprawl is not simply low density, but also involves scattered development, commercial strip development, or
large expanses of single-use development. Nevertheless, density is
highly correlated with almost all measures of urban sprawl and is
the measure used most frequently in this literature (see reviews by
Ewing and Cervero, 2001, and Badoe and Miller, 2000). When used
alone as an indicator of sprawl, density should therefore be inter
✩ This is a revised version of Working Paper UCI-ITS-WP-05-1, Institute of Transportation Studies, and University of California Irvine. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the University of California Energy Institute and
the University of California Transportation Center. Kenneth Small, two anonymous
referees, and especially Jan Brueckner provided many useful comments on earlier
drafts, but the authors bear sole responsibility for any remaining errors.
## * [Corresponding author. Fax: +1 949 824 2182.]
_[E-mail address: dbrownst@uci.edu (D. Brownstone).](mailto:dbrownst@uci.edu)_


preted as a proxy for access to employment, shopping, and other
travel destinations. The main reason density is used so frequently
is that it is one of the few indicators of sprawl that is consistently
measured across space and time, and it is readily available in most
relevant data sets.
Aggregate studies examining the bivariate relationship between
vehicle miles traveled and density find a large significant inverse effect (see Newman and Kenworthy, 1999). These studies are
flawed because they do not account for the possibility of residential self-selection, which is the tendency for those households that
prefer non-private vehicle travel to locate in dense areas with more
transit and shorter trip distances. Many studies use disaggregate
household data to attempt to control for observable differences
between households living in low and high density areas. One of
the best of these is Bento et al. (2005), which used the 1990 National Personal Transportation Study to build disaggregate models
of number of vehicles per household and vehicle miles traveled
(VMT) per vehicle. They supplemented the density measures in the
data with road density, rail and bus transit supply, population centrality, city shape, jobs-housing balance, population density, land
area, and climate. Bento et al. (2005) found that the magnitudes of
the impact of any of their built environment measures were frequently statistically insignificant and small in magnitude.
Although disaggregate studies that include a rich set of socioeconomic control variables (e.g. Bento et al., 2005) are less subject


-----


92 _D. Brownstone, T.F. Golob / Journal of Urban Economics 65 (2009) 91–98_


to residential self-selection bias, it is still possible that residents of
high density areas differ in some unobservable characteristics that
influence their travel behavior. The only way to deal with this possibility is to build joint models of residential (or density) choice
and travel behavior. One of the first studies to do this was Boarnet
and Sarmiento (1998). They used the percentage of buildings built
before 1945, the percentage of buildings built between 1945 and
1985, the percentage of residents more than 65 years old, and the
percentage of foreign residents as instrumental variables for residential density, and they found no stable link between density and
VMT.
Bhat and Guo (2007) use San Francisco Bay Area data to build
an ambitious joint model of residential location and number of
household vehicles. Their model allows for self-selection effects
(correlation between the error terms in their equations), but after controlling for a rich set of covariates they do not find any
significant effects. Bhat and Guo find statistically significant but
quantitatively small impacts of built environment measures (street
block density, transit availability, and transit access time) on vehicle ownership.
We also directly model the joint choice of density and VMT to
control for potential selectivity, and we also include a rich set of
socioeconomic variables using the California subsample from the
2001 National Household Travel Study described in the next section of this paper. We chose to work with California because it
has as much variation in the key variables as the U.S., but is relatively homogeneous in climate, fuel, and vehicle prices. Unlike
previous studies we also explicitly model vehicle fuel consumption
to account for the possibility that residents of high density neighborhoods choose smaller, more fuel efficient vehicles. This might
be due to the relative difficulty of maneuvering and parking large
vehicles in dense neighborhoods. Fang (2008) uses the same data
to show that residents of dense neighborhoods choose fewer trucks
and more small cars.
Unlike Bhat and Guo (2007) and Fang (2008) we do not explicitly model the number of vehicles or their type. This greatly
simplifies the econometrics and allows us to easily deal with problems caused by non-random data selection as described in the next
section. The third section describes our simultaneous equations
model in which residential density, vehicle usage (VMT), and fuel
consumption are joint endogenous variables. The fourth section describes the results, which are similar to previous studies in finding
a statistically significant but quantitatively small impact of residential density. Even though our model allows for joint causality
between the endogenous variables, our preferred model has density causing VMT (as in Bento et al., 2005) and fuel usage. The final
section concludes and argues that the impacts of increased residential density are too small to make increasing density a relevant
policy tool for trying to reduce VMT or greenhouse gas emissions
from residential vehicles.

**4. Estimation results**

The best model uses housing density at the Census block level,
although the other six land use variables also produce acceptable
models and similar results. The structural equation model was estimated using weighted three stage least squares with bootstrapped


in Table 3. Note that the estimates in Table 3 are computed under the assumption that the structural errors are uncorrelated. The
overidentifying restrictions for this model cannot be rejected at
any usual level of confidence. Table 4 gives the restricted reduced
form estimates corresponding to the structural model in Table 3.
The reduced form gives the total impact of the exogenous variables on endogenous variables. Note that the exclusion restrictions
imposed on the structural model in Table 3 imply different exclusion restrictions on the restricted reduced form in Table 4 due to
the nonlinear relationship between the two models.
The squared multiple correlations for the structural equations
are 0.11 for housing density, 0.37 for annual mileage, and 0.95 for
annual fuel usage. For the reduced-form equations, the squared
multiple correlations are 0.11 for housing density (same as the
structural R[2] because there are no endogenous variable effects on
housing density), 0.37 for annual mileage, and 0.42 for fuel usage.

_4.1. Interpretation of results_

_4.1.1. The effects of land use density_
The model implies that, if two households are identical in all
aspects measured by the exogenous variables in the model, but
one household is located in a residential area that is 1000 housing units per square mile more dense the household in the denser


-----


96 _D. Brownstone, T.F. Golob / Journal of Urban Economics 65 (2009) 91–98_

**5. Conclusions and directions for further research**

We specified a simultaneous equation model that accounts for
self selection effects in estimating the influence of residential density on household vehicle annual mileage and fuel consumption.
This model was estimated using a method that corrects for missing
data that is non-random and related to the endogenous variables.
Once we included a complete set of sociodemographic control variables, we could not reject the hypothesis that there are not significant self-selection effects (similar to Bhat and Guo, 2007). We find
that density directly influences vehicle usage, and both density and
usage influence fuel consumption. Comparing two households that
are similar in all respects except residential density, a lower density of 1000 (roughly 40% of the mean value) housing units per
square mile implies a positive difference of almost 1200 miles per
year (4.8%) and about 65 more gallons of fuel per household (5.5%).
This total effect of residential density on fuel usage is decomposed
into to two paths of influence. Increased mileage leads to a difference of 45 gallons, but there is an additional direct effect of
density through lower fleet fuel economy of 20 gallons per year,
a result of vehicle type choice.
Unfortunately for those wishing to use land use planning to
control residential vehicle use, it is very difficult to increase the
density of an established urban area by 40%. Downs (2004, Chapter 12) shows that increasing the density of an existing metropolitan area by 40% requires extreme densities of new and infill development. Bryan et al. (2007) have recently developed a consistent
historical database of U.S. city and regional densities. These data
show that only 30 out of 456 cities increased population density
more than 40% between 1950 and 1990, and the median city in
this sample decreased population density by 36%. The cities that
did increase population density by more than 40% are similar to
Santa Ana, California. They experienced large increases in lowincome immigrants into very tight housing markets. The increase
in densities in these cities was largely accommodated by cramming
more people into the existing housing stock. Of course, increasing
dwelling unit density is even harder than increasing population
density.
As expected, the most important exogenous influences are
number of household drivers and number of workers, but education and income also are significant. Isolating the effects of
number of workers on fuel consumption allows the development
of models aimed at forecasting the effects of employment levels on residential transportation energy consumption. There are
also demographic, race, and ethnicity effects, as retired households
are more likely to live in less dense residential areas, and singles
and non-White households are more likely to live in denser areas.
This research can be usefully extended in a number of directions. Adjunct geographic location information can be merged into
the NHTS dataset to provide more information about the households’ neighborhood characteristics. For those households in major
metropolitan areas it might be possible to obtain information on
accessibility to public transportation. An expanded model can then
be developed to jointly determine public transit accessibility along
with residential density and transportation energy use.
Detailed geographic information can also be utilized to empirically examine the claim that balancing the number of residences
and jobs within a community will reduce residential transportation
fuel use. Tract-level Census data could be used to develop measures of “jobs-housing imbalance” for each of the NHTS California
sample members and then test whether these measures have any
significant impact on vehicle use and fuel use.
The present method for handling the endogenous sample selection caused by missing energy information also invites improve


-----


98 _D. Brownstone, T.F. Golob / Journal of Urban Economics 65 (2009) 91–98_


yield the same quantitative results. The structural method should
yield more efficient estimates if the equations explaining the missing data process are correctly specified. The problem is likely due
to the joint normality assumption required by standard structural
methods. Bhat and Eluru (2008) have developed a promising new
methodology using copulas can be used to relax this assumption.
Finally, the present research concentrates on California, using
only that portion of the NHTS national sample. This work can be
expanded to the national level, both as a check on the stability
of the models and to empirically examine the claim that California
driving behavior has unique characteristics that cannot be captured
by standard socioeconomic measures.

    